---
id: 235
title: Enough
date: '2014-04-07T10:00:44-04:00'
author: 'Paul Nowak'
layout: post
guid: 'http://eternalrevolution.com/?p=235'
permalink: /enough/

categories:
    - Charity
tags:
    - help
    - Jesus
    - poor
---

Years ago, I remember putting a lot of hours in a short period of time into getting my second book, [Guerrilla Apologetics for Life Issues](http://www.amazon.com/Guerrilla-Apologetics-Life-Issues-ebook/dp/B007IO7C84/ref=ragemedall), ready for an upcoming conference. One book, or one product, is not enough for a company. 

However, the book was a disappointment sales-wise. Despite the benefit of being a writer for LifeNews.com at the time and being "out there" in the movement, the general response to the book was summed up in the remark a woman made to me: "Pro-life arguments? That's ok, I already know enough about that." ***Enough***. 

I heard the word used again and again in regards to pro-life, or anti-abortion groups and movements. It was shocking to hear how many pro-life leaders, groups, and representatives would echo the sentiment, "We are doing enough," in order to wave off or discredit another pro-life group's initiative, work, or other effort. 

As much as loathe the word "enough" being used in such a context (a great discussion should take place to explore just what level of action will be "enough" to combat a social evil like abortion, especially after 40 years), I eventually realized there was another word that was more troubling in the statement. ***We*** are doing enough. Who is we? This group, this church, people like me. Seems harmless enough until you realize that the call to love one another, to do for the least, and to ensure social justice was not a call to "join up" to a group, but an individual call to action. Jesus didn't issue recruitment calls to join an international nonprofit to raise awareness to social justice issues, He said "Sell all you have and give to the poor," "Whatever you do for the least of these, you do for Me." While I found this attitude prevalent in many pro-life groups I encountered, they by no means have a monopoly on the poisonous sentiment. Charitable foundations, outreach programs, churches and awareness campaigns reek of the attitude as well. Don't use a group membership to shrug off your responsibility. What are ***you*** doing? 